Flexbox is a one-dimensional layout system. When a parent uses display: flex, it becomes a flex container and its direct children become flex items.

The main axis is the direction of flex-direction, which is row by default. The cross axis is perpendicular to the main axis. If you set flex-direction to column, the axes swap, but alignment behaves the same way.

Example of a nav container:
.nav { display: flex; flex-direction: row; gap: 16px; }

Container properties:
- flex-direction controls whether the main axis is a row or a column.
- flex-wrap decides whether items stay on one line or wrap to a new line.
- justify-content aligns items along the main axis.
- align-items aligns items along the cross axis.
- align-self overrides align-items for a single item.
- gap adds spacing between items without extra margins.

Possible justify-content values include flex-start, center, flex-end, space-between, space-around, and space-evenly.

To center content on both axes, use:
.hero { display: flex; justify-content: center; align-items: center; min-height: 100vh; }

Item sizing in flex layout uses flex-grow, flex-shrink, and flex-basis.
- flex-grow defaults to 0 and controls how much an item takes from extra space.
- flex-shrink defaults to 1 and lets an item shrink when the container is too small. Setting it to 0 prevents shrinking.
- flex-basis defaults to auto and is the starting size before growing or shrinking.

Shorthand flex: grow shrink basis makes these values easier to write.
- flex: 1 means the item grows equally with other flexible items.
- flex: 0 0 200px means the item is fixed at 200px and does not grow or shrink.
- flex: auto means the item sizes itself to its content and then grows if there is extra space.
- flex: 2 means the item receives twice the extra space compared to flex: 1.

When both width and flex-basis are set on a flex item, flex-basis takes precedence. Prefer using flex-basis inside flex layouts.

A common sidebar pattern is:
.sidebar { flex: 0 0 240px; }
.main { flex: 1; }

The order property changes only the visual order, not the HTML order, so do not use it to fix reading order or accessibility.

For a responsive navbar, allow wrapping:
.navbar { display: flex; align-items: center; justify-content: space-between; gap: 24px; flex-wrap: wrap; padding: 12px 24px; }
.navbar .links { display: flex; gap: 16px; }

Using flex-wrap: wrap lets items move to a new line instead of overflowing.

---

CSS Grid is a two-dimensional layout system, letting you define rows and columns.

Example grid container:
.gallery { display: grid; grid-template-columns: repeat(3, 1fr); gap: 16px; }

The fr unit represents a fraction of the available space. repeat(N, track) reduces repetition when defining columns.

Some common column definitions are:
- 1fr 1fr 1fr for three equal columns.
- 2fr 1fr for a first column that is twice as wide as the second.
- 250px 1fr for a fixed sidebar with a flexible main column.

Grid placement uses lines, not cells. A three-column grid has four vertical grid lines numbered 1 through 4.

For example:
.feature { grid-column: 1 / 3; grid-row: 1; }
.tall { grid-row: span 2; }

Tracks you define are explicit. Extra items beyond those tracks create implicit tracks, which are sized by grid-auto-rows or grid-auto-columns.

Named template areas let you describe layout like a map.
.page { display: grid; grid-template-columns: 240px 1fr; grid-template-areas: "header header" "sidebar main" "footer footer"; }
.site-header { grid-area: header; }
.side { grid-area: sidebar; }
.main { grid-area: main; }
.foot { grid-area: footer; }

This approach makes layout easier to read. To make it responsive, redefine the grid in a media query, for example at smaller widths change the grid-template-columns to 1fr.

A powerful adaptive grid pattern is:
.cards { display: grid; grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fit, minmax(220px, 1fr)); gap: 20px; }

auto-fit packs as many columns as fit and lets cards stretch to fill the row. auto-fill keeps empty tracks and may leave gaps. minmax(220px, 1fr) means each column is at least 220px and can grow.

---

Positioning changes how elements participate in layout.

static is the default. The element stays in the normal document flow and top/right/bottom/left do nothing.
relative keeps the element in flow while allowing it to be shifted by offset properties, and it still reserves its original space.
absolute removes the element from the normal flow and positions it relative to the nearest ancestor with position other than static.
fixed removes the element from flow and pins it to the viewport, so it stays visible while scrolling.
sticky acts like a normal element until it reaches a scroll threshold, then it sticks in place.

Top, right, bottom, and left only work when position is relative, absolute, fixed, or sticky.

A common badge pattern uses a relative parent and an absolute child:
.card { position: relative; }
.card .badge { position: absolute; top: 8px; right: 8px; }

If the parent has no positioning set, the absolute child will anchor to the page instead of the parent.

fixed is useful for a persistent top bar, back-to-top button, or chat widget. It is removed from flow and can overlap content, so body padding should match the bar height if needed.
sticky is useful for section headers and table headings. It requires a scrollable parent and no overflow: hidden on ancestor elements.

z-index controls stacking order for positioned elements. Higher values appear on top. Each positioned ancestor can create a new stacking context.
.modal-backdrop { z-index: 100; }
.modal { z-index: 101; }
.tooltip { z-index: 200; }

Use a simple scale such as 10, 100, 200. If z-index seems not to work, check for missing position or an ancestor that created a new stacking context.

---

Choose Flexbox when layout is one-dimensional, like a row or a column. Flexbox is best for aligning items in a line such as navbars, toolbars, or button groups. It is also helpful when content size drives spacing and when items should wrap naturally.

Choose Grid when layout is two-dimensional, with both rows and columns. Grid is best for page structure or card galleries, especially when items need to align across rows and columns and the layout determines placement.

Grid is for the page skeleton, and Flexbox is for components inside it. One axis means Flexbox. Two axes means Grid.

A combined page structure example uses grid for the page and flexbox for the navbar and card interiors:
.page { display: grid; grid-template-rows: auto 1fr auto; min-height: 100vh; }
.navbar { display: flex; justify-content: space-between; align-items: center; position: sticky; top: 0; }
.menu { display: grid; grid-template-columns: repeat(auto-fit, minmax(220px, 1fr)); gap: 20px; }
.card { display: flex; flex-direction: column; }

Grid defines the page skeleton, Flexbox aligns items inside the header and cards, and sticky keeps the navbar visible while scrolling.


